Sa ikatlong linggo sa ating pakigbisog against a formidable enemy.
As always, I give my sincerest gratitude to all those who are fighting in the
frontlines: Our doctors, nurses, allied health professionals, police, soldiers,
civil servants and everyone performing essential services in the private
sector. I assure you that your efforts will be rewarded.
Your heroism will not be forgotten.
Saludo kami sa inyo.
Let me thank the LGUs who are doing their best to contain the spread of the
virus in your localities. I see that you are employing innovative programs and
initiatives to address the needs of your constituents.
‘Yan ang dapat. Tulungan.
Rest assured that the national government is behind you as we safeguard the
welfare of our people in your communities.
I issued an order through Executive Secretary Medialdea clearly laying down
the responsibilities of each department in implementing the Bayanihan to Heal
as One Act. I have given them their marching orders, emphasizing the need
for sufficient authority, so that they do not have to go back to me and ask for
clearance for each and every action they have to take. All of the details of our 
actions will be part of my report, which will be submitted to Congress pursuant
to Bayanihan Act.
There are now only two powers in the law that I reserved strictly for
myself: One is the power to direct the operation of private establishments.
The other is the power to require businesses to prioritize contracts for
materials and services necessary for the crisis. I will exercise these powers
only when absolutely necessary.
The government is now taking action and undertaking several
key measures to overcome and recover from the effects
of this pandemic. These measures have three main priorities: (1) Providing
Emergency Assistance to Affected Sectors, (2) Securing Facilities
[and] Resources for the Health Sector and (3) Performing Fiscal
and Monetary Actions for the Economy.
FIRST: The government is now launching the largest and widest social
protection program in our country’s history --- pinakamalaki itong tulong na
ibibigay ng gobyerno sa mamamayan sa history natin, eh ngayon lang tayo
nagkaroon ng problemang ganito --- to make up for the loss
of economic opportunities due to the quarantine measures in place for
COVID-19.
We have allotted 200 billion pesos for low-income households who are badly
affected by the current crisis. Sila ang nasa informal sector and those who live
day-to-day on subsistence wages or “no-work, no-pay” arrangements.
Beneficiary-households will receive emergency support for two months based
on the regional minimum wage.
However, I still count on everyone to also look out after their fellowmen ---
their countrymen. To those who have more in life, I implore you to share in
the cost of taking care of the less fortunate and keeping our society
intact. They have also contributed to our prosperity in one way or
[another]. So, let us support them in this crisis.
Let it be said that, in the hour of our country’s greatest need, we all looked
out for and helped each other.
Buksan natin ang ating puso sa nangangailangan.

I also appeal to the private sector to contribute, in any way
you can, in dealing with this national emergency. We implore employers to do
their part in protecting the welfare of the millions of Filipino households that
belong to the formal sector and depend on their employers for continuous
livelihood.
For those who have silently helped, away from the cameras, maraming
salamat po.
The government will provide a recovery package—especially to micro, small,
and medium enterprises—to help deal with the economic effects of this
pandemic. My economic team is already creating the guidelines for this as I
speak.

To our farmers and our fisherfolk: We have not forgotten you and
government is now employing quick response measures to help you during
the crisis as well as ensure food productivity, availability, and
sufficiency during the period of the pandemic.
Nandito ang gobyerno para sa inyo.
The government is also ensuring the unhampered flow of cargo and their
workers to maintain the continuous and steady supply of food, goods and
other essential supplies and items. A price freeze on commodities is already
in effect and measures to curtail hoarding and profiteering are also in place.
Uulitin ko --- hindi ito panahon para kumita. Hindi ito panahon ng
pagsasamantala.
Food packs and essential non-food items are also being distributed [to] LGUs
in Metro Manila and the rest of Luzon. Contaminated areas in the Visayas and
Mindanao are receiving similar assistance. More will be given to augment the
requirements of LGUs in the coming days as we repackage the items in our
stockpiles.
Gagawin ko lahat para walang magutom.
SECOND: We are marshalling and deploying the resources of government to
provide our frontline health workers with everything they require so they can
save as many lives as possible.
We are now procuring medical supplies, devices and personal protective
equipment.
About 1 million medical protective items are being acquired right now, with
the government and the private sector working together to purchase or
produce the necessary quantities.
We are also ramping up our capacity to test more broadly to take a fuller and
more accurate picture of the spread of COVID-19 in the country. We
will also build, operate and accredit more medical facilities and laboratories in
the coming weeks.
The outpouring of donations and support from the businesses,
organizations, foreign governments and private individuals over the past few
weeks have also been overwhelming. I therefore like or would like to
acknowledge the following for their help in this crisis:
• The Government of China
• The Government of Singapore
• The NGCP led by Bigboy Sy and Robert Coyuito
• Ramon Ang
• Enrique Razon
• Manny Pangilinan
• Lucio Tan and Michael Tan
• Simeon Heo of [Shopee] Philippines
• Century Peak Corporation
• [Joji] Gotianun-Yap
• Udenna Foundation of Dennis Uy
• Also, Robert Seng
• Archie Po, ‘yung who suffered a loss --- buhay niya, empleyado niya, pati
‘yung eroplano nag-crash on an evacuation mission to Japan. My
condolences to the families and I assure you na tutulong kami sa anumang
paraan. Do not be discouraged.
• PAGCOR headed by Andrea Domingo
• The World Health Organization
• Mammoth Foundation China
• Jack Ma
• Ciriaco Lopez
• Global Fund
• [Americares] Foundation
• UNFPA
• Aboitiz Foundation
• D&L Corporation
• Golden Topper
• Landers Superstore
• Unilab Foundation
• Alliance Global
• Philippine Disaster Resilience Foundation
• Temasek Foundation, as well as the countless others who have sent their
assistance in our time of need.
On behalf of the Filipino people, I thank you [for your] compassion and your
generosity, and my personal gratitude.
Mahal kong mga kababayang Pilipino, nasa ikatlong linggo na tayo sa ating
crisis na hinaharap. At tayo’y hirap sa pera, sa medical supplies, sa lahat. Eh
dati ho naman talagang kulang ang pera natin at kulang ang medical
supplies.
At hindi lang ho tayo, pati ‘yung Amerika ganun rin kasi hindi natin akalain
buong mundo na ganun kabilis dalawang araw lang, after receiving the
advice from China, the crisis was already here: COVID-19.
Ang masasabi ko lang, meron tayong 200 billion na ibinigay sa akin ng
Kongreso para gastusin ko. Iyon naman ho ang ginagamit kong pakalat
ngayon na pera para mabigyan ang lahat. Galing doon sa walang trabaho,
may trabaho, kalahating trabaho. Ang mga mayaman, hindi na kasali.
Ako nama’y umaasa na itong ating mga trabahante na Pilipino ay gawin nila
ang lahat para sa kapakanan ng ating bayan. At ang kami dito, gawain ko ang
buong kaya kong gawin para ho sa inyo.
Kaya nga hindi ako nakalabas eh ilang araw, dalawang araw. Pero usually in
times of crisis ho kailangan ang isang trabahante ng gobyerno na binigyan ho
ng trabaho para humarap sa inyo, makipag-usap sa inyo.
Ito ho ang garantiya ko: Ginagawa namin ang lahat ng makakaya namin. May
mga doktor na, mga nurses, attendants, namatay. Sila ‘yung nasawi ang
buhay para lang makatulong sa kapwa. Napakaswerte nila. Namatay sila para
sa bayan. Iyon ang dapat ang rason na bakit tayo mamatay.
Huwag tayong mamatay sa ibang rason, nasagasaan ka lang at wala ka
namang ginawa. It would be an honor to die for your country, I assure you.
At ako naman ho, ang pilosopiya ko ho ganito, sa nagtatrabaho, kung
protected ka lang, eh make yourself fully covered, protected para hindi ---
walang madisgrasya. Pero ang doktrina ko sa buhay is ako, si Rodrigo
Duterte, kung panahon ko na, panahon ko na.
So ganon na lang ang pagtingin ko kasi wala man rin akong magawa.
Pumupunta ako doon sa mga lugar na may giyera, pumupunta ako doon sa
may lugar na may pumuputok ‘yung bomba, pumu --- pumupunta ako doon
sa likod ng mga sundalo at nagrarakrakan sila ng…
Eh hindi ko masabi kung kailan ako, kaya sabi ko na lang, “Diyos ko, ‘pag
panahon ko na, kunin mo na ako. Huwag kang mag-atubili. Bahala ka na.”
So sa mga kababayan ko, hindi ko naman sinasabi na sundin ninyo ang
aking pilosopiya. But somehow let the thought comfort you that I really
worry about you, that I worry that you will not be able to reach an old age
with your children and grandchildren.
Kasi ako nandiyan na eh. Patapos na ako, kaya ko masabi ‘yan. So trabaho
lang tayo, ang mga supplies nandiyan na, at makabili na tayo ng kailangan
ninyo.
Ngayon, sa mga tao na binigyan ng --- people tasked of distributing the
money, distributing the food, distributing the relief goods, kindly do it. I use
the word “to a T”. Kung hindi ninyo naintindihan ‘yan, mag-research kayo.
Pero talagang ‘pag nagkamali kayo dito, hindi ko kayo palusutin. I will see to
it even tomorrow, if I discover some embezzlements, some hoarding there,
at dina-divert ‘yung pagkain sa mga tao na dapat hindi sa kanila, you better
think.
I am not a cruel man. Pero kung may report ang pulis, I will order your
detention hanggang matapos itong COVID-19.
Sabi ko huwag ngayon. Huwag na huwag kayong mandaya, mangurakot at
taguin ‘yung mga pagkain at ‘yung iba hindi bigyan kasi… You know, people
sometimes think that they own whatever they receive from government.
This is not yours, neither is it mine.
Pero kung mamulitika ka tapos mabalitaan ko na ‘yan ang nagawa mo, I will
suspend you ora mismo. And for those who are really absconding the
money, I will detain you, I said; and maybe I will release you pagkatapos ng
COVID.
Hindi ako nananakot. Nagpapasalamat ako sa buong --- lahat ng ating mga
doktor, who are honest, who --- talagang nagta-trabaho. Sa inyo po,
personal kong gratitude na hindi mabayaran ng pera. Nagpapasalamat rin
ang taong bayang Pilipino. Salamat po at ako’y regularly mag --- makipagusap sa inyo until this crisis is over.
Huwag kayong matakot ngayon. Huwag na huwag kayong matakot kasi sabi
ko may pera ako at kung meron man ang palpak-palpak diyan kaunti, ayusin
namin ‘yan. Ayusin ni Lorenzana ‘yan, the implementor, pati ni Año sa DILG,
at itong si Galvez ho. Puro military na ‘yan sila.
At as a matter of fact ganito, lahat ng kontribusyon, lahat, ibigay mo doon
sa opisina na set up ng Task Force. At may --- kung may releases man,
lahat, accounted ‘yan tapos then there’s another audit in the integrity of the
procedure.
‘Yan lang po. Nagpapasalamat ako sa lahat ng trabahante
ng gobyernong nandiyan. At ako naman po’y at the same time nagbibigay
ng warning: Totohanan ko talaga kayo.
Sa crisis tapos gawin mo pa ‘yang… Dapat ka talagang ikulong. Hindi kita irelease at huwag kang… Hindi ako maniwala ng kaso-kaso. Hayaan mo
magpapa-preso ako balang araw kung mali ang sinabi ko at ginawa ko.
Sa inyong mga Pilipino, mga kababayan --- kababayan, mahal ko, kamong
mga Bisaya, sunod lang mo. Sumunod lang kayo at walang problema.
Daghang salamat.