I have to address our countrymen because they might minimize iyong
contagion. They might just --- paano-ano lang, palaboy-laboy lang. And the
problem is they continue to go out, when our purpose is really to just maybe
secure them in their homes so that they could not go out and transmit the
disease.
Mahirap kasi itong COVID-19 is --- even the mere contact of the skin and if
you do not take the precautionary measures then you will get it and you will
die.
Ang ano ko sa mga kababayan ko baka nga minamaliit ninyo „yung problema
at contact kayo nang contact and suddenly sabay-sabay itong puputok then
we will have a problem. Talagang problema ito.
So whether or not it is severe or it is just a minor --- maybe not as really as
serious as the other medical crisis noon, we are put on notice that it is really
dangerous for now. There‟s danger.
So kayo, if you want to test the waters and end up getting sick well… Kasi
ang sinasabi namin huwag kayong lumabas muna ng bahay. I understand
that the workers who are working in Manila or outside, in Manila residing
outside but working inside, just the same you continue to spread the disease
by saliva, contact and everything. So kung hindi kayo magtulong, medyo
mahirapan tayo dito pagka baka sabay-sabay puputok „to.
The problem is really economy. Iyong sanang mga malalaking enterprises
dito, maybe you can consider paying the 13th month pay or just paying
them maski kalahati sa sweldo nila kung walang trabaho as a way of
showing your solidarity with the Filipino at this critical time.
Or food. Ito namang food si Rolly will have to go around iyong mga ano
siguro, Rol, you utilize all vehicles of government available, just go around
and maybe asking if there is somebody starving or in need of food. What I
would like to assure you ang ano dito is: saan kami kukuha ng pagkain „pag
hindi kami lumalabas? Now, it behooves upon the barangay captain. Itong
mga barangay captain makinig kayo, this is a mandatory duty, it does not 
have to have a law because the proclamation itself suggests that there is
really a need for you to work with government. And if you violate this, then
you can be liable for dereliction of duty or other [regulatory?] measures
which you are supposed to do and do not do it and then you violate a law.
The barangay captains should call a number and at least food, rice and some
--- ano „yung ulam pwede ninyong ibigay sana para sa ating mga
kababayan.
Now, I have been assured by Ramon Ang mismo of San Miguel and the other
food conglomerates that there will be sufficient food, that there will be no
hunger in the coming weeks because we have enough supplies. I was
assured in a text --- I forgot who got. [Sino „yung may text sa aide ko?]
[Senator Christopher “Bong” Go: Ako, sir.] Ah nandiyan sa iyo? Bong,
pakibasa mo na, Bong. I would like to ask Senator Go to read the statement
of Ramon Ang. [livestream cut]
I‟d like to express my gratitude publicly to Mr. Ramon Ang for his good grasp
of the problem. Nakuha niya. It‟s not a matter of food, it‟s not a matter of
getting back your capital, it‟s not a matter of business. But it‟s a matter of
helping one another.
Mukhang --- it leaves a bad taste in the mouth but I‟d like to mention the
big companies „yung maalaala ko lang. We have had our… I know that
meron tayong undercurrent but that is not a personal one for you and for
me, but it‟s one for the people. It was an issue of people‟s interest.
But I‟d like to address „yung mga mayayaman like, for example, well, ikaw
Pangilinan and the Ayalas and sila Coson sa itong mga big companies,
Robinsons, you might be able really to alleviate the situation by just
understanding also the plight of the workers who are not working now and
lawfully are not really in a position to demand.
But I said kayo na lang umiintindi, and if you try to help, kindly tumulong na
lang kayo. I will designate somebody after this meeting because there will
be changes in the structure. Hindi naman nagbago --- hindi „yung structure
lang ng Task Force.
So with that, may I be allowed to just read my speech or my talk with the
people of the Republic of the Philippines.
My dear countrymen,
As of 9 am, today, the confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the Philippines has
risen to 140, with a death toll of 12. Still low. It is a figure that is rising day
by day. Beyond our borders, the whole world has been shaken by the spread
of this disease. At first, it was China and the East Asian region, which is still
in the midst of the crisis as we speak. But now, according to the World
Health Organization, the epicenter has shifted to Europe.
Wala rin tayong magawa. Alam mo we want to do business, we want to
make money, we want to move but there is no interaction now and there is
no trade to speak of and there are no flights going out, in, and for you to do
business. In other words, if you go there, you are alone and please
understand that we are talking to you honestly and in good faith.
To address this crisis, I placed the entire country under a State of Public
Health Emergency.
And that is why mayors now can go ahead and issue ordina --- not really
ordinances but executive orders to make the environment of their
municipality more conducive to a healing process.
Hindi mo na kailangan nang mag-convene ka pa ng government, mga city
council because with this public health emergency, you can ask the mayor
responsible to execute the laws of the land, the ordinance plus the --- the
laws of the national government.
So hindi mo na kailangan dito na mag-ano pa, maghingi pa kayo, maghintay
pa kayo ng… Because I‟ve --- I have read somewhere or maybe I‟ve heard it
in --- over the ra --- TV, radio, na „yung ibang munisipyo naghihintay pa.
With this emergency, hindi na po kailangan.
Just go ahead and the mayor will do it for us para walang is… Tsk. Tawag
nito? Let me… Para wala masyadong ruckus, walang debate, isa lang --- one
line lang ngayon, mayor lang muna. And he can come up with any measure
to protect public health, public interest, public order, public safety and
whatever is needed to make life more livable in your place.
As long as you are in good faith, sa akin ho hindi na kailangan. I don‟t know
sa some… There is always a smart aleck in this country.
Just for example, meron dalawa kaagad sinasabi --- they go to the opposite
side by saying, “ah „yung mga pulis hindi kayo pwedeng mang-aresto kasi
ganun ganun.”
You know, you do not have to say that. Eh ano mo lang you‟d encourage
people to „yang to assert something na kaunting bahay lang, makipag-away
sa pulis. Correct, you cannot be arrested if you are out. But if you are
advised to go home, and you grapple with the police with words and
ultimately it comes to --- dalhin ka sa istasyon for a public disturbance or
pub --- disobedience to a lawful authority, pwede ka talagang dalhin sa
istasyon. At kung lumaban ka sa pulis, it is a direct assault.
But itong may --- may mga dalawa kasing… Para marinig lang. Sabi na hindi
--- hindi kayo dapat na hulihin ng pulis. Ang problema because you are
confronted. In our ordinary times, there is really no need to be talking about
it publicly just to be --- to be heard. Para lang marinig ka ng tao,
makisawsaw ka. Eh ayaw mo magpaiwan sa mga issue, so gusto mong
sumali rin para marinig ka, “Oh meron akong contribution, ito „yan ha.”
Huwag mong ganunin ang tao. Just say: obey. Kay kung sabihin mo hindi ka
pwedeng hulihin, hindi ka pwedeng anuhin. And then you are advised and
you become --- become a hothead, makipag-tulakan ka sa pulis kung
sabihan ka, “Dito ka magdaan. Dito ka, huwag kang pumunta diyan because
you are not allowed. There is now a ban.”
Eh tapos upon the advice of this… Ewan ko ba. May mga tao talaga na ayaw
magpahuli. Alam ng mga tao bright kayo. At alam ninyo bright kayo. Mga
tao lang pati kayo. Hindi kami kasali.
You --- you seem to give a side comment that is not good. Instead of saying
na hindi ang pulis, sabihin mo, “Sumunod kayo sa mga pulis because ang
pulis kumukuha ng order dito sa itaas.”
Kami naman, ako sa itaas ayaw ko. I hate it. Ayaw ko makipag-ano sa
kapwa ko tao but the problem is there is a crisis, so you have to obey. Eh
hindi naman sila eh. Hindi naman sila maging presidente. Hindi naman sila
sinabi sa batas na sila ang magdala ng laro dito pagka panahon ng ganito.
It‟s the Executive department. So better…
If you give an order, make it milder and more acceptable and not cause a ---
parang a bit of a… Naiirita „yung mga police pati military na sabihin mo na
ganun. But hindi naman kayo. It‟s not you. It is the military commanders
that they will obey.
Remember, this is an emergency. And during an emergency, tumabi kayong
lahat and give it to the people who are responsible for protecting the
country, alleviating the suffering and enforcing public order.
Starting… To address this crisis, I placed the entire country under a State of
Public Health Emergency.
Ito nga po. Kasali na ang mga mayor dito. No need of an ordinance. Go
ahead and enforce the laws that are laid down by the national government
and the laws that are already in the penal statutes, in the books.
I made a pronouncement last Thursday approving the placement of the
National Capital Region under Community Quarantine.
Itong other countries, because of the sensitivity of the Filipinos, eh
maraming ano kasi, hindi magkaintindihan ang Task Force. They wanted it
more acceptable --- sa libro lang man. But actually in other contract --- in
other towns, countries, it‟s really a lockdown.
So dito muna tayo. Papaano natin mapigilan ang contagion kung sige kayo
labas nang labas tapos you mingle with the others? Nakita mo naman the
crowded queues that are being created by „yung gustong sumakay.
Whether --- whether you like it or not you have to be near people and there
have --- there will be contact sa --- as a consequence. So you cannot avoid
people-to-people contact, the very thing that we are not allowing because it
will spread the disease.
Kung maaari lang po stay home. And for the businesses, pagka lumala ito…
Sabagay day-to-day ang conference. Tingnan natin. „Pag lumalala ito, you
better close down your business. That‟s an order because you will also help
in propagating the disease instead of helping. „Yan ang order ko sa inyo.
Starting yesterday, what has been in effect has been a general quarantine,
which allows a substantial freedom of movement within NCR, and even
allows the transit of people to and from NCR for purposes of work and other
essential services.
Kaya ngayon, pupunta ka doon sa trabaho mo, eh mag --- halos mag...
Whether you like it or not, it's a working place. You are there. 'Pag
humatsing ka, makuha ng lumilipad 'yung --- the virus. Sabi nila the vi ---
'yung virus. Kino-correct ako. I would like to pronounce it the virus kasi galit
ako. Sabi ko, 'Saan itong virus na ito?'
So ganun na lang. Ang tawag ko sa kanya kasi galit ako, virus. Well,
lumilipad 'yan everywhere especially in cramped and not well-ventilated
places. So you run the risk of going home, giving it to your children, and
then your children the next day will play with other children.
We cannot really control the contagion perfectly. We want it to be perfect.
But there will be the downsides. Food 'yung isa. 'Yung isa naman 'yung
sweldo ninyo. Kaya ako nakikiusap sa malalaking negosyo, magtulong na
lang kayo.
At 'yung mga suppliers dito sa mga sari-sari na manggaling sa inyo, kindly
help so that there is at least an economy working around if this can be done
by your skeletal force. Huwag 'yung lahat na mag-assign lang kayo ng mga
tao na kakaunti to minimize. At least kung iilan lang ang lalabas, with the
social distancing, eh baka mapababaan natin itong delikado na sitwasyon.
Ang isa naman, we have the DSWD under General Bautista. Siya 'yung magiikot through the barangay captains. Barangay captains, you have a ---
mabigat itong trabaho ninyo ngayon, pareho tayo. I am not saying that you
should work also.
No, you are mandated to work. So dito, ang para isang linya lang, General
Bautista --- si Secretary Bautista… Nag-retire na ito. Pagkakilala ko kasi si
general, matagal na kasi dito 'yan. Si General Bautista will have his people
go around and look for people who are hungry.
And that is the job of the mayor kasi ikaw 'yung mayor ng barangay mo,
ikaw ang maghanap para isang tumbok lang ang gobyerno and we can give
the help necessary. I hope that I have my --- made myself clear on this.
However, upon further study of worldwide trends and measures, and the
need for extreme caution during such a time as this, I have come to the
conclusion that stricter measures are necessary.
For this reason, pursuant to my powers as President under the Constitution
and Republic Act No. 11332, I am placing the entire mainland of Luzon
under [Community] Quarantine until April 12, 2020, coinciding with the
entire end of Holy Week.
So pati na ang Luzon kasi sa ibang lugar may pumuputok na. And since we
cannot --- we do not have the luxury of time of waiting whether or not it is
really true or validating that this is real --- there is really such a connection
or a contagion somewhere, hindi ako pwedeng mag-ano mag --- I cannot go
into a guessing game. See? I have to... I have to act and better maski na
kung wala 'di walang mangyari. Now if there are already --- or there is
already a contagion and there are cases which need to be attended to, then
government can move faster.
It's better to assume that it is true because what you would need only is the
validation at makagalaw na kaagad tayo. But let me make this clear. This is
not martial law. Under the Constitution, martial law is declared when there is
invasion, rebellion, or public safety requires it.
Alam mo, 'yung itong mga ganito, the freedom of movement is sometimes
curtailed, ang sabihin ng mga tao martial law. This is not a martial law.
Martial law is 'yung rebellion, may away, at public safety requires it. Ngayon,
kung may invasion, ganun rin. Martial law.
But wala dito. Walang invasion, walang rebellion, and public safety does not
--- public safety requires it. Itong... Itong but --- and kasi. So hindi ito
kailangan natin. Hindi ito martial law. Huwag kayong matakot, walang
magdi-display ng baril diyan except 'yung mga members ng Armed Forces or
police.
Ang kalaban natin 'pag martial law ay ang mga tao na sumasalakay at
naghihimagsik. Pero sa panahong ito, ang kalaban natin ay tayo at ang sakit
na COVID.
But let us make no mistake. We are in the fight for the lives. We are at war
against a vicious and invisible enemy, one that cannot be seen by the naked
eye. In this extraordinary war, we are all soldiers.
Lahat po tayo ay sundalo sa digmaang ito. Bata man o matanda, lalaki o
babae, bawat Pilipino, anumang estado sa buhay, ay maituturing na sundalo
sa digmaan na ito. Of course, the formalities of our doctors, health
professionals and health workers, to whom we will forever be thankful.
In due time, we shall express to them our gratitude in a more tangible way,
when this crisis is over. In the meantime, I have directed the DBM and DOH
to find a way to best compensate our health workers.
You know, the last time I saw --- we had a meeting and I saw Andrea
Domingo sa PAGCOR. Sinabi ko sa kanya kung may pera siya, at sinabi ko
na ibuhos mo ang pera nito kasi kailangan natin. So PAGCOR alone donated
two billion for --- naibigay sa Task Force for the fight against COVID. Iyon
pwera 'yung nasa line agencies na nasa kanila na, nandiyan na 'yon. Ito
pang dagdag.
I hope na may pera pa tayo. I'm sure we have. We have the money. Kasi
ngayon sa administrasyon ko 'to, sinasabi ko sa iyo may pera tayo. We've
been able to save and we have been very sparing in our „yung mga gastosgastos natin. Wala tayong --- we do not have any expenses in government 
that are unnecessary or 'yung mga nakikita ko na projects which are bound
to fail, talagang kina-cut ko na. Sinasabi ko na „wag „yan. Maybe because sa
--- without being really maghambog ako. Hindi naman ako ma --- dahil
matagal kasi akong mayor at nakikita ko ang takbo ng isang bagay na kung
hindi karapat-dapat para sa gobyerno, pinuputol ko na kaagad.
(Senator Go: Excuse me, Mr. President. Na-miss lang nimo ning isa ka kuan.
Kani pagbasa nimo na-miss nimo ning naka-encircle. Pakibasa na lang.)
(President Duterte: Wala man dito.)
(Senator Go: „Di, naa diri. Nilaktaw --- diri nilaktaw ka. Pakibasa lang aning
kana.)
Ah si Senator Go, maano ma --- he has very sharp eyes. And kailangan
basahin ko „to, nakaligtaan ko raw. It will be an enhanced quarantine, during
which the movement of everyone will be significantly limited. Work in public
and private sectors shall be limited to a work-at-home arrangement. If such
an arrangement is not feasible... Kung pwede mong matrabaho ito tingi-tingi
sa bahay mo, okay. Pero kung wala na, if they have no choice, you have to
stay home.
We have to contribute to the fight. Lahat tayo may contribution, ako, ikaw.
Lahat tayo magbigay ng kanya-kanyang ano --- well, gift to the government
and that is by obeying the laws, obeying the regulations.
Everyone will stay at their homes, leaving their houses only to buy food,
medicine and other basic necessary for survival in the coming days. Only
such establishments that provide these basic necessities and services will be
open.
Do not be scared about this. „Wag kayong matakot na ganito. Pwede man
kayong lumabas, isa, magbili ng pagkain. And if the eateries and the --- the
mga restaurants, mga carinderia are able to operate, so by all means…
Well, ang ano dito is the --- „wag kayong magisa-isa. Eh tutal „yun namang
luto mantika „yan eh. Kung may mantika ka diyan na bumubula, pakibuhos
na lang „yung virus diyan sa…
P******** na --- kaya nga I‟m not changing the --- galit ako sa virus na
„yan. My fellow Filipinos, I fully understand the apprehension that --- that
you feel. And I know it will be difficult for many of us in the next few days
while in this quarantine --- while this quarantine is in effect.
„Wag kayong matakot. Ako na ang nagsasabi sa iyo, „wag kayong matakot.
At kung „yung barangay captain ninyo ay tatamad-tamaran, siya ang
puntahan ko. Remember, if there is a barangay captain who does not fulfill
his duty in going around and trying to find out how the citizens are faring, if
you are afraid to die of COVID-19, then you have no business being a
barangay captain.
Kami naman dito and the military which are in the coming days sila rin ---
kung lala in --- kung maglala ito, then kami together with the rest of the
military and the police, kung mamatay kami, kung pwede magdasal kayo,
magdasal kayo sa amin.
„Pag ayaw mo rin, eh „di „wag na lang. Okay lang. „Yung --- „yung mga
kaibigan namin sa kabila --- tutal magkita man tayo sa impiyerno balang
araw.
My fellow Filipinos… (Senator Go: Resume na ka balik. Kini ra kay diri na
kutob.) Ah okay. Dito na naman. Mukhang --- this come in chapters.
All we have --- all have is a responsibility to fight this disease and prevent it
from spreading to our fellowmen. These social distancing measures --- „yung
pag-distansiya mo. Kanina nga pagdating ko gusto kong mag ---
makipaglamano kay Secretary Guevarra, tinanggihan niya ako. [laughter]
Tinago niya „yung kamay niya sa dibdib niya, so ibig sabihin ayaw niya. Ah
„di o sige. Ayaw niyang mahawa „di…
But you know ulitin ko ha? Baka sabihin ninyo ito para sa lahat. Ang
gobyerno --- ang taga-gobyerno --- unahin ko na „yung na-assign diyan sa
frontline sa COVID, if you are there assigned and if you feel that you are not
ready to maybe have the problems of being sick, you --- you can tell your
superior. We will have ano...
Pagka wala na kasing iba, kung takot na lahat, ang papasok ang Armed
Forces pati ang police. Sila „yung magdala and sabi ko nga eh kung
mamatay sila, I would also like to join them para walang masabi ang tao.
But kami lalabas rin. Ako lalabas ako. I --- I --- you will see me. Ay lalabas
ako. Hindi ako maniwala niyang --- kasi ako may ibang doctrine ako sa
buhay eh. And that is kung panahon ko na, panahon ko na either COVID,
bala, crash o anuman.
Kung hindi ako mag-survive ng COVID, eh hindi ako karapat-dapat maging
mayor dito sa Pilipinas.
We all have a responsibility to fight this disease and prevent it from
spreading to our fellowmen. These social distancing measures are necessary
to kill the adversary.
„Yung „wag kayong masyadong mag-ano. Tama man --- tama si --- I
congratulate Secretary Guevarra for being ever conscious of the danger.
Actually, it‟s danger --- you pass… Uuwi „yan siya sa bahay maya, tapos sa
mga anak niya. So bantay kayo kasi pag-uwi ninyo, kung saan kayo nadikitdikit „yung mga pawis ninyo, „yun na pipila kayo.
Kayong mga may negosyante, slow down. Tone down your business or, if
possible, entirely stop --- cessation muna sa operations. Tutal ilang ilang
araw na ito. Kasi „yung incubation is 14 days eh. So itong 14 days malaman
na natin kung ilan pa ang madagdag. Mag-ano lang kayo, cooperate. Tutal
para ito sa ating lahat.
Our response therefore, is to not leave any quarter to our enemy, by
preventing close contact. The only way to ensure this effectively, at this
time, is to put in effect the enhanced quarantine that I have described, to
last until April 12 or earlier, once we acquire further information warranting
the relaxation of these measures.
Titingnan... Kaya sabi ko every day... 'Nung sinabi ko every day, ano sila,
medyo nakasimangot. Sabi ko lahat ng Cabinet members. Si Bello medyo
sad face kasi ewan ko kung saan siya maglakad.
But the problem is I said, bayad tayo ng tao at ipakita natin nagtatrabaho
tayo. So we meet every day to assess at magbilang.
As of today, ang patay, dose. At ang --- 'yung 140. Hindi tataas 'yan „pag
sumunod kayo. Walang makapitan itong si virus eh. Yawa na ito. Wala
siyang makapitan. Kung malayo kayo at a distance mag ubo siya, you just
turn around.
In the meantime, I have directed the DSWD, DOLE, DOF and other agencies
to put in place, with utmost dispatch and all feasible measures that will ease
the burden of the Community Quarantine in our country, especially those
who are living on daily wages, and small - medium enterprises. We shall
make sure that, during this trying times, all of you will feel government‟s
concern in your --- for your welfare.
Kaya sinabi ko, huwag kayong matakot. We will devise a way that --- 'yun
namang malalaki kung makatulong kayo sa maliliit, for example, 'yung mga
sari-sari maubusan sila ng supply, they can go to you, maybe sign a 
promissory note in the meantime with the government as a guarantee. Ako,
I will guarantee that I will pay you. Ako na nagsasabi. Hindi na kailangan ng
memorandum 'yan. All you have to do is to remind me and I am placing it as
a matter of my oath of office.
Kung wala, bigyan lang ninyo 'yung tama lang. The usual orders tapos kung
walang --- hindi makabayad, ako na ang magbabayad.
Siguraduhin natin na madarama ninyo ang malasakit at pagmamahal sa
inyong gobyerno sa panahong ito.
Ang problema, hindi sa lahat nag --- hindi lahat nagmamahal ng gobyerno
natin ito. Kayo bang mga NPA nagmamahal kayo sa gobyerno? 'Pag hindi,
tumulong kayo. Distancing at huwag na ninyo muna galawin ang mga
sundalo. Ano muna tayo, 'yung ceasefire lang. Ceasefire muna tayo. Ako na
ang naghihingi, ceasefire.
Kindly give me that allo --- if you really want that we will be at all times on
talking terms, in this time of crisis, kindly cooperate and help. Mas mabuti
pa tumulong muna kayo. I will repay you with a good heart in the coming
days.
To the private sector, I have this appeal: Magbayanihan kayo. No, kailangan
basta ang barangay captain. You know, we all have everything that you
need. It does not mean to say that when you are sick, when you need
medical attention, walang magdala sa iyo. Hindi 'yan. Hindi sabihin na kung
may magwala diyan, walang pulis. Mayroon ngang pulis na nakakalat eh.
And remember what I said: Obey the police and the military. Do not quarrel
with them and do not start ruckus that would amount to a violation because
you will be arrested and brought to prison --- disobedience of authority, o
baka nagkamali ako, then acts of public disturbance. You can be arrested.
Sumunod lang kayo at wala tayong problema.
To the industry players, business leaders, foundations and the like, I would
like to join hands with you and combine our efforts in fighting COVID-19 as
one nation, as one people.
While the government is doing its best, we can more effectively contain the
spread of the virus if we adopt a united approach.
Maraming pwedeng maitulong ang pribadong sektor para mapagaan ang
hirap ng ating kababayan sa ating bayan. Ito lang po ang:
Pag release ng 13th Month Pay: Kahit prorated lang --- 'yung ano divided by
mo sa mga buwan --- prorated lang tulong na iyan ay ating mga kababayan
habang naka-quarantine.
Pagbibigay ng Moratorium on Rental Fees para sa mga renters and tenants:
Huwag ninyong bilangin 'yung araw na hindi makapagtrabaho, hindi
makalabas 'yung ating mga kababayan.
Hindi ko sinasabi batas ito. Hindi ko sinasabi na regulasyon ito. But sinasabi
ko, kung ikaw ay Pilipino nagmahal ng kapwa mo tao, baka you know, you
can mitigate the hardship.
Wala na nga, nakakulong na nga, wala na nakain, so mag isip pa sila.
Ngayon, kung ayaw mo, huwag mong pilitin na magbayad. Patirahin mo
muna diyan sa lugar niya, ako ang magbayad. Ganun din. I swear to you
upon my oath of office, I will pay kung hindi sila makabayad.
Pagbibigay ng one month reprieve sa bills payments ng Basic Utility
Providers. Gawan po natin ng paraan na mapagaan ang gastusin ng ating
mga kababayan sa panahong ito at para maiwasan pa rin ang paglabas ---
ang paglabas ng mga tao.
Well, anyway, I have said my --- I do not... My facility for the Tagalog
dialect is quite terrible pero I hope that you can understand my language.
Pagtulong ng Big Business sa mga Small and Medium Scale Enterprises:
Tulungan din na --- tulungan din sana ng malaking kumpanya ang mga
maliliit na negosyante para hindi mamatay ang kabuhayan nila.
I urge our business leaders to find ways to help small businesses and ease
the burden which is felt by the ordinary citizen right now.
In relation to this, I would happy that several big businesses and companies
have already expressed their willingness to partner with the government in
this time of crisis.
I have mentioned a little while ago, the businesses that I think are already
into the activity of helping our medium scale businessmen.
So, I hope --- I'll go around so I hope that I will be able to see one of this
act of a big business helping the small ones.
Ngayon pa lang magpapasalamat na po ako sa inyong tulong. Maraming,
maraming salamat galing po sa puso ko.
My countrymen, again we discuss our most potent weapons in this war
against COVID-19 are not bullets or ammunition, but our compassion and
consideration for our Filipinos in the next few weeks.
Ito, hindi ito giyera. Ang --- ang problema nito, 'yung bala ng sakit. „Yung
ma --- mag-hatsing, mag-ubo tapos mag… Whatever that will pass. „Yung
iba naman maghawak.
Ito, hindi ako nagpapatawa ha at hindi ako nagbabastos ng tao. Kasi may
mga Pilipino ganon eh. Pagka [blows his nose] sikma ganon, iganun lang sa
kamay tapos kung sa ano „yung pinakamalapit, kahoy o upuan, iganun sa
kamay. Marami „yan. Marami akong nakikita na ganun.
„Yung minsan „yung ganun lang tapos iganun tapos iiwan. If that person is
already positive for investigation na ano, lalala talaga ang sitwasyon natin.
So those... You --- you… For those who are really into something like that,
kindly avoid. Iyang bastos na gawin. Walang iba „yan. But… Bisaya „yan
binastos. Hindi mo naman dapat gawain „yan. And those are things that you
should do para hindi mag-ano ang…
Our countrymen, our most potent weapons in this war against COVID-19…
Ah wala naman „to.
As I have said before, they are not our enemy. They are simply to ensure
the movement of every person during the next few weeks will be consistent
and we will not derail our collective efforts against the disease.
Again, do not fear. Wala kayong dapat katakutan sa military pati police.
They are just there to execute order. Hindi naman nila order. Order dito sa
itaas „yan, dito sa amin.
So inuulit-ulit kasi „yung reminder. You should love your military men.
Namamatay na nga „yan sa giyera. Kita mo uuwi doon sa kanila kabaong na
lang. You should --- you should feel for your soldiers and policemen. They
are not your enemies. Although sometimes you --- if you are a criminal or if
you do something, I said, which is not --- inconsonance with pub --- the
public good, masita ka.
But I said those are the things that can happen in a democracy. There‟s
always a police. Maski anong klase, autocratic, diktador ka, kailangan mo
ang pulis. Dito, we are a democracy, and we try to really act as one. If you
are doing nothing wrong and if you do not quarrel with them, please do not.
Pero hindi ka naman sabihin mo may baril „yan, gagamitin „yan. Depende
lang kung may baril ka rin. Pero kung mag-sigaw-sigaw ka lang diyan,
naturally, I said that is a disturbance of the public order. And that is the time
that you are --- you can be arrested for disobedience. Otherwise, the police
and the military do not have any business at all interfering with your lives.
Dito na lang, mag-shortcut na lang. Ang haba eh.
As I end, I solemnly urge everyone to pray to the Almighty God, who has
the power to defeat every enemy, visible or invisible. Pray for all doctors and
health professionals and workers, pray for your government, pray for the
country.
Even as we maintain physical distance from each other, let us remain
[strongly] united in spirit to fight this dreaded disease. And with our unity
and the blessing of God, we shall overcome.
Maraming salamat po.
Okay. So… [applause]
--- END ---