It has been a week since we called for a Community Quarantine and its
enhanced form in Metro Manila and various parts of Luzon. We in government
continue to respond to the public’s needs, mobilize resources and oversee
developments. We are also addressing the COVID-19 pandemic challenges
confronting our nation.
First, let me reiterate my sincerest gratitude to all our
courageous frontliners in this war, especially our healthcare workers—our
doctors, nurses, medical technologists, and other allied health professionals.
Maraming, maraming salamat. Asahan niyo ang suporta ng inyong gobyerno.
I am saddened by the news that the virus has claimed the lives of our doctors
along the way. Lahat po sila ay bayani and not only that, talagang bumilib
ako. Bihira akong sumasaludo ng tao pero ‘pag mga doktor natin, mga health
workers na nadisgrasya, talagang saludo ako sa inyo. Wala na kayo dito sa
mundong ito pero ganun na lang ang pagtingin ko sa inyo.
To the able officials and staff of the Inter-agency Task Force on Emerging and
Infectious Diseases, thank you for staying on top of this situation.
To the brave men and women of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the
Philippine National Police, thank you as well for ensuring peace and order in
these trying times.

I also thank the rest of the frontliners who ensure that basic services are
provided to our people, from those manning various government agencies,
groceries, banks, food establishments, and delivery services, among
others. Maraming, maraming salamat po.
To the gracious members of the private sector who are foregoing profit to
alleviate the suffering of our people; to the valiant volunteers who are
bravely supplementing our frontliners; [and] to the noble civil society
organizations who are working tirelessly in calling for donations and
performing charity work— Thank you very much for your kindness,
compassion and generosity.
I especially thank Congress for granting the executive department with special
powers --- through the Bayanihan to Head as One Act--- to the Bayanihan to
Heal [rather, I’m sorry] to Heal as One Act --- to effectively respond to
the challenges caused by the COVID-19 global pandemic.
I particularly thank Senate President Vicente Sotto III and House Speaker
Alan Peter Cayetano for the strong and decisive leadership
you have demonstrated in shepherding this measure to fruition during this
critical time in our national history.
To the members of both houses of Congress who sponsored and voted for this
measure, I express my sincerest gratitude to all of you for granting our most
urgent requests. Finally, the Executive Department can move, decide and act
freely for the best interest of the Filipino people during this health crisis.
The Department of National Defense and the Department of the Interior and
Local Government, along with the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the
Philippine National Police, are now ramping up the implementation
of the National Action Plan or NAP, as we speak, to reinforce the efforts of the
Department of Health in containing COVID-19.
Alam mo tatlo lang ‘yan sila eh: Department of National Defense, Department
of Health, Department of --- ‘yung kay Rolly, DSWD and the DILG --- some of
the most important departments that are now in action.
Reports on our progress on the National Action Plan will be given regularly by
the Secretary of National Defense, serving as the National Action Plan chair
with the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government as vice chair.
To the Filipino people, rest assured that your entire government is working
hand-in-hand to safeguard your health, safety and well-being in the face of
the threat posed by COVID-19. We will address all the different issues brought
about by this pandemic as well as ensure the protection of all of our people,
especially those who are serving in the frontlines.
Supplies of food, water and other essentials will be provided to you throughout
this ordeal. Financial assistance will also be extended especially to those in
the margins and the vulnerable groups. Halos lahat ho makatanggap. Eh hindi
naman lahat ‘yung kagaya ni --- ni Bong Go. Hindi naman niya tanggapin ‘yan.
Gagawin namin ang lahat. Hindi namin kayo pababayaan.
I now call on every Filipino to participate in this war by following the guidelines
set by the national government and your local officials. Nothing is more
important [now] than your cooperation.
I repeat: Stay home. Huwag matigas ang ulo. The outcome of this war
depends largely on you as well.
I also call on relevant agencies to ensure the speedy delivery of basic medical
supplies and equipment to health facilities. From the approval, importation
and to the delivery, everything must go smoothly to make sure that we do not
waste time.
I… Alam mo isang bagay talaga na alam ng lahat is itong pa-dilly-dally,
patamad-tamaran. Kailangan pagpasok ng papel, process mo kaagad. I-linya
mo ‘yung --- you line up the tables where the papers should go one after the
other para madali. Cut red tapes. I do not want red tapes. I do not want so
many questions. Pagka sinertify (certify) ng isang government employee ‘yan,
I said, do not commit a mistake and we will all be happy and comfortable.
Huwag ninyong… Kung may… Kung gusto ninyong magluko, huwag ngayon
itong panahon na ito.
To my fellow public servants, let us set aside our differences and work in
solidarity to overcome this pandemic. We only have one common enemy and
that is COVID-19. Our transparency, integrity, accountability and
responsiveness are needed and I expect all of you to exercise all these in
safeguarding our fellow Filipinos.
As President, I assure you --- I assure the public that the government will
be on top of this situation at all times. We will not leave anyone behind.
Sabay sabay nating labanan ang COVID-19 para sa kabutihan ng lahat.
I ask the entire country for your patience, understanding and utmost
cooperation. With your support, I am confident that we will emerge
triumphant. Nothing is more formidable and resilient than the Filipino spirit.
Matindi ang kalaban. But we will not
surrender. Hindi tayo susuko. Tayo ay lalaban.
Yes, things will not be easy. [But] we Filipinos are tough.
Mas malakas ang Pilipino sa anumang hamon. Now, we all must do
what we can and must. Para sa ating bayan.
I look forward to the day that we Filipinos can finally claim victory [in] this
war and emerge as a stronger and more united Filipinos and Philippines.
Maraming salamat po. Usbon nako, ayaw mo’g kahadlok. Tagalugin ko:
Huwag kayong matakot. Nandito ‘yung gobyerno ninyo para kayo pagsilbihan
at totoong pagsilbihan. Salamat po.
--- END ---